--- Chunk 1 ---
GSTA THEMIS 9&

. . World Tourism Organization J)
Tourism Alliance

FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE UNIVERSITY

WASHINGTON DC

THE GEORGE
. WASHINGTON
&

GLOBAL TOURISM
ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

Sustainable Tourism: International Cooperation for Development

ONLINE TOOL KIT AND RESOURCE SERIES

Primary Authors
Brian T. Mullis
Frances Figart

Sustainable Travel International

Contributors
Roberta Hilbruner, USAID
Donald E. Hawkins, George Washington University

This publication is made possible by the support of the American People through the United States
Agency for International Development to the Global Sustainable Tourism Alliance cooperative agreement
#EPP-A-00-06-00002-00. The contents of this publication are the sole responsibility of the author(s) and

--- Chunk 2 ---
do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government.

Table of Contents

Preface

Acronyms

Unit 1 — Introduction to Sustainable Tourism

Unit 2 — Tourism Policies, Practice, and International Cooperation

Unit 3 — Sustainable Tourism Tools and Strategies

Unit 4 — The Green Economy and Tourism

Unit 5 — Tourism, Trade, and Development

Unit 6 — Biodiversity Conservation and Protected Areas

Unit 7 — Collaborative Mechanisms and Social Networks

Unit 8 — Sustainable Tourism Standards and Quality Assurance Systems

Glossary {

References 1

--- Chunk 3 ---
Unit 7 — Collaborative Mechanisms and Social Networks

Unit 8 — Sustainable Tourism Standards and Quality Assurance Systems

Glossary {

References 1

In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. section 107, any copyrighted material herein is distributed without
profit or payment for non-profit research and educational purposes only. If you wish to use copyrighted
materials from this publication for purposes of your own that go beyond ‘fair use’, you must obtain
permission from the copyright owner.

International Institute for Tourism Studies
The George Washington University 2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052

46
52
67
79

96

Preface

--- Chunk 4 ---
International Institute for Tourism Studies
The George Washington University 2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052

46
52
67
79

96

Preface

The target audience for this manual includes professionals working on tourism-related projects in developing
countries, including staff from donor and government agencies, non-governmental organizations, consulting
firms, universities, businesses, and other entities. Some specific examples of audiences that would benefit

include:

© Residents or expatriate professionals engaged in development assistance activities

® Local authorities such as a destination management organization, tourism office, promotion agency, or
organization exercising governance power over tourist activities

--- Chunk 5 ---
® Local authorities such as a destination management organization, tourism office, promotion agency, or
organization exercising governance power over tourist activities

®@ Public, semi-public, or civil society administrators or professionals responsible for the development,
promotion, or organization of tourism activities

© Destination management companies responsible for managing commercial activities for city, theme
park, or resort destinations

© Local, public, or private tourism operators offering activities, transportation, lodging, food, attractions,

events, or others concerned with enhancing the long-term sustainability and competitiveness of

tourism destinations

Private, local entrepreneurs

--- Chunk 6 ---
events, or others concerned with enhancing the long-term sustainability and competitiveness of

tourism destinations

Private, local entrepreneurs

Non-governmental organizations seeking to fulfill their missions through sustainable initiatives

Consultants involved in tourism planning and development

University professors teaching tourism or planning courses

We would like to express our deep appreciation and gratitude to a number of individuals who shared their
knowledge and experience in the production of this publication, particularly Donald E. Hawkins, Annessa
Kaufman, and Kristin Lamoureux of George Washington University.

--- Chunk 7 ---
The Global Sustainable Tourism Alliance Management Partners — FHI 360', The George Washington
University, Solimar International, and the Nature Conservancy — provided helpful guidance. Roberta
Hilbruner of USAID offered numerous reviews, suggestions, and outreach with those working in the field.

We also express our appreciation to the World Tourism Organization and the WTO Themis Foundation for
permission to utilize information from their publications and to pilot test this publication.

We would like to express our deep appreciation and gratitude to a number of individuals who shared their

knowledge and experience in the production of this publication, particularly to our editor, Jon Kohl and to
Annessa Kaufman and Kristin Lamoureux of George Washington University.

--- Chunk 8 ---
knowledge and experience in the production of this publication, particularly to our editor, Jon Kohl and to
Annessa Kaufman and Kristin Lamoureux of George Washington University.

Brian T. Mullis and Frances Figart

' FHI has acquired the programs, expertise and assets of the Academy for Educational Development (AED).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 2

Acronyms

BINGOs — Big International NGOs

BITC — Business in the Community

CAP — Conservation Action Plan

CBD — Convention on Biological Diversity

CER — Certified Emission Reductions

CSR — Corporate Social Responsibility

DANTEI — Development Assistance Network for Tourism Enhancement and Investment
DMO — Destination Marketing Organization or Destination Management Organization
FDI — Foreign Direct Investment

--- Chunk 9 ---
DANTEI — Development Assistance Network for Tourism Enhancement and Investment
DMO — Destination Marketing Organization or Destination Management Organization
FDI — Foreign Direct Investment

EMG — Environmental Management Group

GATS — General Agreement on Trade in Services

GCET — UNWTO Global Code of Ethics for Tourism

GEF — Global Environment Facility

GDP — Gross Domestic Product

GRI — Global Reporting Initiative

GSTC — Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria

HRM — Human Resource Management

IADB — Inter-American Development Bank

IFC — International Finance Corporation

ILO — International Labor Organization

LDCs — Least Developed Countries

LOHAS — Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability

MDGs — Millennium Development Goals

NGOs — Non-Government Organizations

--- Chunk 10 ---
ILO — International Labor Organization

LDCs — Least Developed Countries

LOHAS — Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability

MDGs — Millennium Development Goals

NGOs — Non-Government Organizations

NTOs — National Tourism Organizations

PPP — Public-Private Partnership

RTAs — Regional Trade Agreements

SCALE — System-wide Collaborative Action for Livelihoods and the Environment
SIDS — Small Island Developing States

SME — Small and Medium Enterprises

STEP — STI’s Sustainable Tourism Certification Program™
STSC — Sustainable Tourism Stewardship Council

TFD — Tourism for Development

TIA — Travel Industry Association

TTSA — Travel and Tourism Satellite Account

UNCED — United Nations Convention on the Environment and Development
UNDP — United Nations Development Program

--- Chunk 11 ---
TIA — Travel Industry Association

TTSA — Travel and Tourism Satellite Account

UNCED — United Nations Convention on the Environment and Development
UNDP — United Nations Development Program

UNWTO — United Nations World Tourism Organization
USAID — United States Agency for International Development
WHC — World Heritage Centre

WTO — World Tourism Organization

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

Unit | — Introduction to

Sustainable Tourism

--- Chunk 12 ---
WTO — World Tourism Organization

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

Unit | — Introduction to

Sustainable Tourism

Many words and phrases have lost meaning and become cliché due to overuse, the word
“sustainability” among them. It is important for this course, then, that such words avoid
misinterpretation. But before we define terms, let us consider the origins of sustainable tourism. This
will provide perspective for commonly used green tourism-related terminology.

A HISTORY OF THE SUSTAINABLE TOURISM MOVEMENT

--- Chunk 13 ---
A HISTORY OF THE SUSTAINABLE TOURISM MOVEMENT

In 1992 a hundred governments came together in Rio de Janeiro to attend the United Nations
Convention on the Environment and Development (UNCED, also known as the “Earth Summit”).
They discussed the state of the world’s environment and measures necessary to decrease impacts of
development on the natural world in pursuit of a sustainable future. Although they made many
important decisions, tourism, as a tool for economic development, was not discussed. Nor did the
summit address tourism’s impacts, positive or negative.

--- Chunk 14 ---
Ten years later, world government leaders came together again, and this time they included tourism in
their discussions. The World Summit on Sustainable Development, hosted in Johannesburg, South
Africa in 2002, focused on assessing progress made since the 1992 Earth Summit, as well as addressing
concerns for the future. By this time, the international travel and tourism industry had earned
recognition as a powerful force in economic and sustainable development. The UN General Assembly
also declared 2002 as The International Year of Ecotourism. The following year, the World Tourism
Organization (WTO) general council and the UN agreed to convert the former into the United
Nations World Tourism Organization as an agency of the UN.

--- Chunk 15 ---
Spurred by this international dialogue, in 2008 the UNWTO, Rainforest Alliance (RA), United
Nations Foundation (UNF), and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) together created
the Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria (GSTC). The GSTC, which we will discuss at length in Unit 8,
seeks common ground and baseline criteria for sustainable tourism. It organizes criteria around four
pillars:

¢ Effective sustainability planning

¢  Maximization of social and economic benefits to the local community
¢ Reduction of negative impacts to cultural heritage

¢ Reduction of negative impacts to natural and cultural heritage

These international agreements and coalitions reflect a broader environmental movement that, since

--- Chunk 16 ---
¢ Reduction of negative impacts to natural and cultural heritage

These international agreements and coalitions reflect a broader environmental movement that, since

the 1980s, has been pushing for sustainable development to which tourism could make a major
contribution.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 4

DEFINING SUSTAINABLE TOURISM

--- Chunk 17 ---
DEFINING SUSTAINABLE TOURISM

To continue this conversation, we must first define tourism and sustainable development. Tourism
comprises activities of people traveling to and staying in places outside their usual environment for at
least one night and no more than one consecutive year for leisure, business, and other purposes.
Sustainable development, which became popular after the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, is broadly defined as
“development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs” (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987).
Sustainable tourism applies the same principle, but to travelers, businesses involved in the travel trade,
and destinations impacted by tourism development.

--- Chunk 18 ---
Sustainable tourism is a form of tourism characterized by a level of intensity and technology that
generates sustainable net social, economic, and environmental benefits. Sustainable tourism is a kind of
tourism that develops in a fair and equitable manner for host communities, both human and natural.
Sustainable tourism is economically viable in the long-term and avoids damage to the physical and
cultural environment. In other words, it is tourism that participates in the management of all resources
that fulfills economic, social, and aesthetic needs while it maintains cultural integrity and biological
diversity, and environmental quality.

--- Chunk 19 ---
Although they often occur simultaneously, sustainable tourism and ecotourism are not the same.
Ecotourism typically involves responsible travel to fragile, pristine, and usually protected natural areas,
and which strives to be low impact and small scale. Like sustainable tourism, ecotourism focuses on
environmental conservation and the improvement of the wellbeing of local people. When sustainable
tourism is done in such a way that the local people not only benefit economically and socially, but also
take a leadership role by initiating and operating the tourism activities, it is known as community-based
tourism. Some believe, however, that practitioners should not invest too much time in distinguishing

--- Chunk 20 ---
tourism. Some believe, however, that practitioners should not invest too much time in distinguishing
among definitions of different forms of alternative tourism given that they all point in the same
direction. One global definition for this family of terms could be a tourism that generates net benefits
for both human and non-human communities found at destinations and throughout the value chain.

--- Chunk 21 ---
Because sustainable tourism not only promotes economic development, but also environmental and
cultural conservation — it employs the concept of a triple bottom line. The triple bottom line is an
expanded baseline for measuring performance, adding socio-cultural and environmental dimensions to
the traditional economic benchmark used in business. A positive triple bottom line represents net gains
in environmental conservation, social benefits, economic profits for businesses, as well as local and
regional economies. It is important to note that net does not imply the absence of losses or damages
across these three dimensions, it only means that the final tally is positive, where positive impacts
outweigh negative impacts. All human activity has impacts.

--- Chunk 22 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 5

We will look more closely at the concept of the triple bottom later in this unit. But first, we examine
differences between traditional and sustainable tourism and to examine the role tourism plays in the
global economy.

TRADITIONAL TOURISM VERSUS SUSTAINABLE TOURISM

Traditional tourism has many drawbacks. It frequently lacks stakeholder involvement, suffers from an
absence of any long-term planning, and has no enforced regulatory framework. Traditional forms of
tourism apply direct pressure to the Earth’s ecosystems, exert stress on host communities, compete for
the use of scarce resources, pollute, are an unstable income source, and often foster community
frustration.

--- Chunk 23 ---
The many environmental impacts of mainstream tourism include air, noise, and water pollution;
congestion; destruction of scenic landscapes; improper disposal of solid waste; interruption in ecological
processes; damage to archaeological and historical sites; and environmental disasters. Social impacts
include clash of values; loss of local jobs; resentment from local communities; overcrowding; over-
commercialization; and an increase in prostitution and sex tourism.

--- Chunk 24 ---
Sustainable tourism, by contrast, creates a viable long-term strategy for success, uses regulatory
frameworks, and creates linkages to other economic sectors. It strives to take pressure off natural
systems and to collaborate with host communities to foster infrastructure benefits and economic
stability. It typically employs women and young people of legal age, creates opportunities for small
entrepreneurs, has low start-up costs with few barriers to entry, and promotes cultural pride,
awareness, and a sense of ownership.

--- Chunk 25 ---
When tourism is sustainable there are benefits for all stakeholders: to the traveler, to the company
providing the tourism, and to interests within the host community. Those who choose sustainable
travel of high experiential and interpretive quality can gain appreciation of other cultures, come away
with an enhanced global perspective, take action to help protect the destination’s special sense of place,
and feel good about giving back. Companies who provide sustainable tourism usually benefit from
improved profitability and competitive advantage, increased market strength customer loyalty,
attraction of talent and enhanced employee loyalty. Host communities involved in sustainable tourism

--- Chunk 26 ---
improved profitability and competitive advantage, increased market strength customer loyalty,
attraction of talent and enhanced employee loyalty. Host communities involved in sustainable tourism
enjoy improved local employment opportunities, increased opportunities for local enterprises, improved
infrastructure and access to services, and increased participation in decision-making.

--- Chunk 27 ---
TOURISM AS A GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT TOOL

Why is tourism so important to global economic development? Rapid and continuous growth over the
past twenty years has made tourism one of the world’s most significant sources of employment and of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Tourism particularly benefits developing country economies, where
most of the sector’s new tourism jobs and businesses are being created. This rapid growth has
encouraged many developing nations to view tourism as a key component to their economic portfolios.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 6

--- Chunk 28 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 6

To provide a perspective on tourism’s impact on the global economy, the World Travel and Tourism
Council (WTTC) and Oxford Economics estimate that the travel and tourism industry earns $6 trillion
or 9.5% of the global GDP, with nearly 260 million people employed in the industry. By 2021 they
predict that travel and tourism will account for $9.2 trillion of global GDP and 324 million jobs
(WTTC & Oxford Economics, 2011).

% of whole economy Direct Total
14> GDP
(constant 2011 prices) Employment

2011 2021 2011 2021
Figure 1.1. World Travel & Tourism Outlook (WTTC & Oxford Economics, 2011)

--- Chunk 29 ---
% of whole economy Direct Total
14> GDP
(constant 2011 prices) Employment

2011 2021 2011 2021
Figure 1.1. World Travel & Tourism Outlook (WTTC & Oxford Economics, 2011)

The United States uses a statistical instrument that measures relative size and importance of the travel
and tourism industry, along with its contribution to GDP. The Travel and Tourism Satellite Account
(TTSA), approved by the UN in March 2002 and endorsed by the UN Statistical Commission, has
become the international standard. In fact, more than 50 countries employ the approach.

--- Chunk 30 ---
Tourism is big business, and when done right, has enormous cross-sector potential to contribute to
economic growth and diversification, poverty reduction, biodiversity conservation, and natural
resources management. It is a powerful tool for addressing other important cross-cutting agendas such
as gender equity, global health, education, and local governance. But successful tourism requires
proper planning and management.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 7

1980 1995 2000 a07 210 v.17.1)
UNWTO Market Trends, Competitiveness and Trade in Tourism Services Section
Figure 1.2. International Tourist Arrivals, 1950-2020, Current Situation and Forecasts (UNWTO,
2008)

THE TRIPLE BOTTOM LINE AND IMPACTS OF TOURISM

--- Chunk 31 ---
THE TRIPLE BOTTOM LINE AND IMPACTS OF TOURISM

Generally speaking sustainable tourism protects people and places. It does this by addressing potential
impacts of tourism on three main areas: environment, society-culture, and economy. Let us look at
each in detail.

Tourism can impact land, air, water, and biotic communities. How a tourism business recycles waste,
utilizes energy, controls water usage, minimizes greenhouse gas emissions, and protects natural
ecosystems all contribute to environmental management. Organized efforts to minimize negative
impacts can greatly improve the chances of sustainability and a healthier and cleaner environment.

--- Chunk 32 ---
Socio-cultural impacts affect communities’ structures and cultures. Tourism providers benefit
communities by discouraging cultural imperialism, supporting cultural diversity, and promoting
tolerance and acceptance of different lifestyles and belief systems. When a tourism business enhance its
positive socio-cultural impacts and helps local communities maintain their cultural integrity in the face
of vast economic and developmental pressures, this can greatly benefit both business and community.
Thoughtful efforts to foster pride in cultural traditions and promote cultural exchange in destination
communities can effectively preserve cultural identity and improve quality of life.

--- Chunk 33 ---
Economic impacts are usually categorized as direct, indirect, or induced. Direct impacts affect all
beneficiaries of monetary transactions such as the tourism businesses, wage-earners, tax collectors, and
other service providers such as a hotel. Indirect impacts include changes in sales, income, or
employment within industries or businesses that supply products and services to the tourism industry

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 8

--- Chunk 34 ---
(e.g., increased sales in linen supply firms results from an increase in hotel occupancy rates). Induced
impacts are changes in economic activity resulting from household spending of income earned directly
or indirectly from the tourism industry and include all sales, income, and jobs that result from
household spending of increased wages or salary (e.g., hotel employees spending their income on
housing, food, transportation, and household products and needs). This is sometimes referred to as a
ripple or multiplier effect. From a development perspective, a tourism business’s success will be
reflected in its total direct, indirect, and induced economic impacts. Such effects generate employment
and business opportunities while improving the bottom line, furthering economic development, and

--- Chunk 35 ---
and business opportunities while improving the bottom line, furthering economic development, and
contributing to a region’s overall appeal.

--- Chunk 36 ---
Leakage is another negative economic impact. When a tourism provider buys supplies or services from
outside the region(s) in which it operates, or when most revenues associated with a tourism service do
not remain in the host economy, money is said to leak out of the local economy and thus provide fewer
local direct or indirect economic impacts. To be economically sustainable for the local economy,
tourism providers minimize economic leakage to the greatest extent possible.

--- Chunk 37 ---
By focusing on the triple bottom line, those who practice sustainable tourism add socio-cultural and
environmental dimensions to the traditional economic benchmark. A positive triple bottom line means
a net improvement in conservation of the natural environment, social benefit for local communities,
and profitability for shareholders as well as gain for national or regional economies.

A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE OF TOURISM’S ROLE IN
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

--- Chunk 38 ---
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE OF TOURISM’S ROLE IN
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

The vision of tourism as a development instrument is perhaps as old as the concept of tourism.
Tourism’s capacity to generate income and wealth, to consolidate and enhance the value of cultural and
environmental heritage, to transmit knowledge and information, and to contribute to peace and
improved international relations has been discussed by many authors from different perspectives —
academic, professional, and governmental — over past decades. It is also clear, however, that actual
tourism policies have paid much more attention to the promotional, microeconomic, and
entrepreneurial aspects of tourism, rather than to establishing methodologies and good practices in
tourism for development.

--- Chunk 39 ---
One initial obstacle to TFD theory and practice has undoubtedly been confusion regarding tourism’s
capacity to generate growth rather than development. Even today, in the context of the United
Nations Millennium Development Goals, we still speak frequently about eliminating poverty through
tourism as if everything could be reduced to correcting inequalities in income and wealth. Even if proxy
variables were used as indicators of development, it would nevertheless seem preferable to use more
sophisticated approaches that use criteria such as “equal freedom and equal distribution of basic goods"
(Rawls, 1977, 1988) or "freedom to realize oneself, but also the capacity to go beyond" (Sen, 2004).

--- Chunk 40 ---
(Rawls, 1977, 1988) or "freedom to realize oneself, but also the capacity to go beyond" (Sen, 2004).
The effects of tourism, measured in these ways, and at least in the medium-term, would transcend the
mere raising of incomes in specific geographic areas or social sectors.

--- Chunk 41 ---
th

The role of tourism as an instrument of development in the second half of the 20" Century
encountered circumstances not conducive to tourism’s actual implementation. From the 1950s to
1970s, tourism policy still had not contributed sufficiently to development theory or practice. In the

1980s and 1990s, the neoliberal theory of development impeded the use of tourism as a public

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 9

instrument. Today, we are truly beginning to establish a new paradigm of development, this time with
a new vision of the role of governance and of public-private tourism policies (UNWTO, 2005).

MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND
THE ALLEVIATION OF POVERTY

--- Chunk 42 ---
MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND
THE ALLEVIATION OF POVERTY

As a new agency of the United Nations, the UNWTO is committed to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). The eight MDGs, targeted for 2015, are:

Extreme Poverty Goal: Halve extreme poverty and hunger

Primary Education Goal: Achieve universal primary education

Gender Equality Goal: Empower women and promote equality between men and women
Child Mortality Goal: Reduce under-five mortality by two-thirds

Maternal Health Goal: Reduce maternal mortality by three-quarters

HIV/Aids Goal: Reverse the spread of diseases, especially HIV/AIDS and malaria
Sustainability Goal: Ensure environmental sustainability

Partnerships Goal: Create a global partnership for development, with targets for aid, trade,
and debt relief

--- Chunk 43 ---
Partnerships Goal: Create a global partnership for development, with targets for aid, trade,
and debt relief

CNA UYU HWN

Of the eight, UNWTO could have the most significant impact on extreme poverty. In fact, poverty
reduction through sustainable tourism development has become a central objective of UNWTO since
the Johannesburg Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002. Research indicates that tourism has
immense potential to help the global anti-poverty campaign. UNWTO’s analysis has led to the
following conclusions:

¢ In the world’s developing countries and particularly the LDCs, tourism is almost universally
the leading driver of economic growth, foreign exchange earnings, investment, and job
creation.

--- Chunk 44 ---
¢ In the world’s developing countries and particularly the LDCs, tourism is almost universally
the leading driver of economic growth, foreign exchange earnings, investment, and job
creation.

¢ It is one few potential comparative advantages common to all of these countries.

¢ It has unique potential to carry foreign exchange and investment directly to the local level as
tourists and entrepreneurs seek new destinations.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS ne)

¢ It can contribute significantly to rural development, agricultural transformation, community

enrichment, and social empowerment, particularly for women.

¢ It can preserve cultural heritage for which excellent examples already exist.

--- Chunk 45 ---
enrichment, and social empowerment, particularly for women.

¢ It can preserve cultural heritage for which excellent examples already exist.

UNWTO currently has a number of initiatives to address poverty. Through the “Liberalization with a
Human Face” campaign, for example, UNWTO advocates progressive liberalization of tourism, with a
focus on sustainability and special needs of developing states. This initiative encourages the rapid
expansion of tourism to catalyze employment, wealth, investment, and poverty elimination (UNWTO,
2005).

Cambodia China Lao PDR Myanmar VietNam Thailand

@ Transport O Travel O Other Commercial Services

--- Chunk 46 ---
Cambodia China Lao PDR Myanmar VietNam Thailand

@ Transport O Travel O Other Commercial Services

Figure 1.3. Breakdown of Economy’s Total Services Exports (%) by Principal Service Items (World
Trade Organization Trade Profile 2007, as adapted by International Institute for Trade &
Development, 2008)

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS lI

TOURISM POLICY, VISITOR EXPERIENCE, AND SYSTEMS THINKING

--- Chunk 47 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS lI

TOURISM POLICY, VISITOR EXPERIENCE, AND SYSTEMS THINKING

The development and implementation of sustainable tourism policies must be based on certain
principles and approaches. Policy must take into account UNWTO’s global vision, the commitment of
multiple stakeholders, and a long-term strategy. It must consider both global and local impacts and
frame all impacts within the Polluter Pays Principle. Finally, policy must reduce risks and respect the
boundaries of tourism development. The next unit will discuss tourism policy in more detail.

--- Chunk 48 ---
Tourism policy then should “ensure that the hosting of visitors is done in a way that maximizes the
benefits to stakeholders while minimizing the effects, costs, and impacts associated with ensuring the
success of the destination” (Ritchie & Crouch, 2003). Tourism development policy moreover consists of
six actions:

Promote sustainable development

Create products for specific visitor market segments
Gain and maintain competitiveness

Enhance visitor experience

Preserve local resources

AY RYN

Improve residents’ quality of life

Sound policy and sustainable tourism development necessitate the management of visitor experiences
at tourism destinations. The visitor experience consists of four phases:

--- Chunk 49 ---
Sound policy and sustainable tourism development necessitate the management of visitor experiences
at tourism destinations. The visitor experience consists of four phases:

1. The pre-trip experience requires both destination planning and tourism provider
selection. In this phase, stakeholders provide information to potential visitors and
travelers who make decisions about their vacations.

2. The access-to-destination experience begins when visitors travel to their destination.
Airlines, immigration protocols, and other intermediaries influence this experience.

3. The on-trip experience starts when tourists actually arrive at the destination. Local
stakeholders are important to this experience.

--- Chunk 50 ---
3. The on-trip experience starts when tourists actually arrive at the destination. Local
stakeholders are important to this experience.

4. The post-trip experience occurs when visitors leave the destination and arrive home.
This phase includes visitors’ reflections on their experience and sharing of their stories
with friends and relatives.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 12

Figure 1.4. Four Phases of the Visitor Experience

Planning

Selection

Post-trip

Segmenting

Demographics

Planning Window

What is planned in advance
Role of travel agent or
distribution channel
Information sources

Trip motivations

Travel partner or group
Value propositions

Disposable Income
Price/Value decision factors
Final selection criteria
Preferred package and
method of purchasing

--- Chunk 51 ---
Trip motivations

Travel partner or group
Value propositions

Disposable Income
Price/Value decision factors
Final selection criteria
Preferred package and
method of purchasing

Disposable Income
Price/Value decision factors
Final selection criteria
Preferred package and
method of purchasing

Experiences desired

Arrival /departure—border
formalities, customs, visas,
immigration, baggage
transport

Specific needs
Accommodation
Restaurants

Service, etc.

Resulting experience
Experience feedback
Frequency of return visits

Resulting experience
Experience feedback
Frequency of return visits

Figure 1.5. The Visitor Experience Value Chain

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

International

MARKETS

(visitors)

MARKET

Inter-Agency

Seem) Coordination

Investment
Policy

--- Chunk 52 ---
Figure 1.5. The Visitor Experience Value Chain

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

International

MARKETS

(visitors)

MARKET

Inter-Agency

Seem) Coordination

Investment
Policy

Citizen Legal
Participation In- Framework
Decision-Making

Governance

Service Industry

Tea, Service Industry

Taxes, Visas MARKET

Financial Policy
& Infrastructure

Infrastructure
(transportation,
utilities,
‘telecommunications)

Traditions Gender

Cross-Cutting Health &
Social Issues Safety

Poverty Cultural

Reduction Heritage Education

Financing

(Private) Marketing

Economic
Growth

Investment

Access to
Markets

Competitiveness

Figure 1.6. Tourism Systems Map of Issues (Volunteers for Ecomic Growth, 2011)

--- Chunk 53 ---
Financing

(Private) Marketing

Economic
Growth

Investment

Access to
Markets

Competitiveness

Figure 1.6. Tourism Systems Map of Issues (Volunteers for Ecomic Growth, 2011)

This phase breakdown is a systems approach helpful to understand sustainable tourism’s components

and how they interact (Figure 1.6). A system is a set of interrelated elements that changes over time. A

systems approach presents the big picture, helps manage for the long term, identifies multiple entry

points, weighs trade-offs and choices, and identifies stakeholders and partners. All are important for

sustainable tourism.

The tourism industry value chain is another systems tool (Figure 1.7). The value chain illustrates

--- Chunk 54 ---
sustainable tourism.

The tourism industry value chain is another systems tool (Figure 1.7). The value chain illustrates

various important linkages that exist between key businesses and their performance. It shows how they

deliver services, explains how to differentiate services through standards and branding, and visualizes

potential points to exploit market demand.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

Tourists

Travel Agents

Outbound

Operators

Inbound Tour

Operators

Hub Hotels

gg
o 2
25
22
EF =

Food Service

Providers

Accommodation

Figure 1.7. Tourism Industry Value Chain (Volunteers for Economic Growth, 2011)

15

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

TRENDS AND CHALLENGES THAT AFFECT TOURISM

--- Chunk 55 ---
15

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

TRENDS AND CHALLENGES THAT AFFECT TOURISM

Systems thinking applied to sustainable tourism reveals many interrelated factors that change over
time affecting travel and tourism offerings. Localized trends affect destinations and international trends
affect the travel trade. The coming decade and a half should see major shifts in the leisure and tourism
industry, reflecting changing consumer values, political forces, environmental changes, and the
explosive growth of information technology. No aspect of the industry will remain untouched. The
challenge for tourism stakeholders in both the private and public sectors is to manage these changes to
achieve and maintain a competitive advantage for their organizations.

--- Chunk 56 ---
Globalization is a major international trend that accelerates access across borders, which for tourism
means more foreign tourists as well as increased global competition among international destinations.
Discretionary income is the most powerful driver of tourism demand.

Political stability is also a prerequisite for the prosperity of most kinds of tourism. Destinations that do
not grow economically because of political constraints generate fewer outbound and domestic tourists.
Conflicts between countries constrain tourism flows but can also benefit destinations perceived to be
safe, such as Costa Rica.

--- Chunk 57 ---
Tourism depends greatly on the natural environment. A region’s attractiveness in turn depends heavily
on climate and ecosystem type and integrity. Tourism development takes root near attractive natural
features. Typically, tourism stakeholders, including researchers, have focused on how development may
enhance management of environmentally sensitive areas and preserve unique environments,
particularly when these become major attractions. In recent years, however, focus has shifted toward
tourism’s role in reducing environmental pollution and demands on resource use.

--- Chunk 58 ---
Finally, technological developments create opportunities as well as threats for the tourism and travel
industry. Tourism is highly dependent upon information and transport technology. The industry needs
to take advantage of technological innovations to renew and develop products and services (Dwyer et
al., 2008).

SUMMARY

Since the 1980s, the environmental movement has fertilized the soil of sustainable development to
which sustainable tourism can make a significant contribution.

--- Chunk 59 ---
It is important to understand the various terms associated with sustainable tourism, differences
between mainstream and sustainable tourism, and that tourism becomes sustainable when it generates
triple bottom line profits of environmental protection, socio-cultural improvement, and economic
health. Sustainable tourism can alleviate poverty, generate income and wealth, consolidate and enhance
the value of cultural and natural heritage, transmit knowledge and information, and contribute to
peace and improved international relations. For tourism to become a tool to effect these changes
requires sound policy that takes into account a global vision, commitment of multiple stakeholders,
long-term strategies, and other considerations. It is helpful as well to apply a systems perspective to

--- Chunk 60 ---
long-term strategies, and other considerations. It is helpful as well to apply a systems perspective to
traveler experiences and the various relationships that exist in the travel milieu, as well as to consider
trends and challenges that affect tourism locally and globally.

--- Chunk 61 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 16

FOR MORE INFORMATION

¢ On value chain analysis, see the Project Development Module.

* On poverty alleviation and the Millennium Development Goals, see the SAVE Travel
Networks Module.

¢ On management of the visitor experience, see the Destination Management Module.

¢ An example of a TTSA is The Alaska Tourism Satellite Account, found at
www.gwu.edu/~iits/Sustainable_Tourism Online _Learning/Mullis/TSA_Final.pdf

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

Unit 2 — Tourism Policies, Practice, and

International Cooperation

--- Chunk 62 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

Unit 2 — Tourism Policies, Practice, and

International Cooperation

Sustainable tourism is often understood as tourism that maintains the status quo and mitigates impacts
on the environment, society, and communities. The last few decades have seen a change in both
philosophy and practice of tourism. This unit addresses some of the ways tourism policies, practices,
and cooperative initiatives employ a sustainable approach in search of the triple bottom line.

UNWTO TOURISM POLICY FORUM

--- Chunk 63 ---
The UNWTO Tourism Policy Forum in 2005 marked the first time that donor agencies, developing
countries, and civil society met at a high-level international conference to focus on how to cooperate
and harness the economic power of tourism for sustainable development. Organized by UNWTO and
George Washington University — chair of the UNWTO Education Council — the forum attracted
200 participants and more than 200 observers from 52 countries, including 20 tourism ministers and
top-level government officials. Participating donor agencies included multilateral banks such as the
World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank, as well as bilateral development agencies such as
USAID America, DGSC/MAE Italy, AECI Spain, DGCID/MAE France, SNV Netherlands, GTZ
Germany, CIDA Canada, and JICA Japan.

--- Chunk 64 ---
The forum’s recommendations in eight key areas led to an impressive declaration which serves as a
useful checklist for stakeholders and policymakers. These recommendations have been particularly
relevant to the MDGs described in Unit 1. Forum participants agreed to the following (UNWTO,
2005):

¢ Build partnerships of equal opportunity and fair representation within destinations, and to
strengthen their leadership

¢ Engender local community awareness of the tourism planning and its benefits

¢ Foster buy-in for the concept of sustainability by all sectors including the sharing of guidelines
and good practices

* Delegate authority for decision-making to the appropriate community level and build capacity
there, and empower local development authorities

--- Chunk 65 ---
* Delegate authority for decision-making to the appropriate community level and build capacity
there, and empower local development authorities

¢ Encourage and facilitate brand awareness and a collective image for a destination community

¢ Recognize the uniqueness of the business perspective as different from that of the public sector
and to communicate effectively in business language

* Develop cross-sector demonstration projects that illustrate linkages, inter-relationships, and
working partnerships

¢* Call upon governments, bi-lateral and multi-lateral institutions to facilitate access to capital of
all kinds, and to provide guidance, training, and support on how to access such funding

--- Chunk 66 ---
¢* Call upon governments, bi-lateral and multi-lateral institutions to facilitate access to capital of
all kinds, and to provide guidance, training, and support on how to access such funding

* Develop land-use policies through a participatory process, and to provide policy incentives for
private land owners

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 18

¢ Enhance communication and coordination between agencies including the use of advanced
information communication technologies

¢ Develop educational programs directed to tourism policy stakeholders including local
communities to promote understanding of cultural heritage resources, and the need for

preservation and social responsibilities;
¢ Encourage the development of a regional network of researchers, practitioners, and donor

--- Chunk 67 ---
preservation and social responsibilities;
¢ Encourage the development of a regional network of researchers, practitioners, and donor

agencies for sustainable tourism development

UNDERSTANDING THE VISITOR

The visitor creates the demand necessary for the survival of destinations and businesses. But what are

the underlying motivations that shape this demand?

«
Oe

seeeeeessesese
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
*
.

. 4 . . Personal/
‘ Gender : - = familylifecycle +
° P. . q influences»
eee wee = . al
Tourist
purchase
ie weoet! decision 7 rll
‘ Age : * andholiday *
q 4 + . q entitlement °
cy - ' *. ~~
2 Individua’s *, : 2 a *
! values and culture * ae, : tag :
: (eg. : a ae * (brochures, :
“ 4s . Type of . 2.0) Pf
ell = experienceor = “Seegeet”
*% holiday required -

. .
. .

. *
*eeaet

--- Chunk 68 ---
. .
. .

. *
*eeaet

Figure 2.1.Tourist Purchase Decision (UNWTO, 2011)

Tourism is different from other consumer purchases because travel experiences cannot be tested in
advance. Tourism involves extensive pre- and post-consumption stages, preceding and following the
customer’s journey from pre-planning and decision-making, through to booking, experiencing and
post-travel evaluation and recollection (see Unit 1 for the phases of a visitor experience). Determinant
motivations are often used as a starting point to profile different market segments of visitors. This

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 19

--- Chunk 69 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 19

segmentation allows marketers and analysts to identify drivers behind tourism product purchases.
Segmentation also relies on values to profile visitors, which is likely more reliable than other criteria,
such as demographics, since people’s values remain fairly consistent over time.

--- Chunk 70 ---
Criteria that shape visitor profiles in the 21“ Century include population location and migration;
variety of tastes; prosperity and attitudes towards work, leisure and tourism; and new technology.
Global and local trends affect the visitor. Transnational companies cater to millions of mainstream
tourists, while niche operators offer local products, services and experiences to individuals and groups.
The rise of low-cost airlines has driven overall growth and democratization of air travel and the
development of destinations not found near major airports, meaning that the air travel system requires
high passenger volumes to ensure profitability.

--- Chunk 71 ---
In terms of market demographics, massive growth worldwide of the senior citizen travel segment
means that the “young old” will continue to play a major role in the tourism industry over the next
two decades and those catering to this market will need to be cognizant of their needs. The growing
rate of divorce, increasing rates of remarriage, older parents with younger children, single parent
families and family groups which include grandparents and even great-grandparents all change the
conventional model of a traditional household and a holiday. The market is also shifting toward visitors
purchasing with conscience. For example, the impact of air travel on climate change may influence
some visitors’ decision of which carrier to use.

Niche
tourism

Wellbeing: Nature Educational:

--- Chunk 72 ---
Niche
tourism

Wellbeing: Nature Educational:

* Spa break Gastronomy: based: Activity: * Photography
- Medical - Wine - - Garden : tal - History

tours
- Safar
- Omithology

tourism tourism - Crafts

* Yoga - Food trails
- Cookery
course

- Cycling
- Diving

Figure 2.2. Niche Tourism (UNWTO, 2011)

THE ROLE OF PUBLIC POLICY INTERVENTIONS

Ultimately tourism development depends on political philosophies. The development of sustainable
tourism has seen a growing interest and involvement of different stakeholders, with the public sector
often playing a leading role. This role can be multifaceted in the way it promotes a sustainable route to
tourism development with varying modes of intervention:

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 20

--- Chunk 73 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 20

© Regulate activities and behavior
@ Obligate compliance with policy objectives (e.g. via tax breaks or additional taxation)

® Encourage people to change their behavior through education, advertising, and social
marketing

@® Do not intervene at all

--- Chunk 74 ---
® Encourage people to change their behavior through education, advertising, and social
marketing

@® Do not intervene at all

The UNWTO Sustainable Tourism Program has been active and influential in promoting a global
framework to coordinate sustainable tourism. The UNWTO’s long-term influence in policy
development has resulted in wide ranging evaluation of sustainable tourism and an extensive range of
research, reports, and conferences on the subject. Such policy work is vital to the development of
sustainable forms of tourism, especially at destinations. Unfortunately the business sector has not
uniformly adopted sustainable principles. Thus UNWTO believes that diffusing examples of best
practice will stimulate voluntary interest across the sector

(UNWTO, 2011).

--- Chunk 75 ---
(UNWTO, 2011).

THE VALUE OF TOURISM IN COMMUNITIES

Human communities and cultures can be major attractions. Managers must sustain these resources so
tourism does not erode their value. As tourism development affects more communities around the
world, the social dimension of sustainability has grown in significance. The sustainability of
communities and their dependence upon tourism has to be balanced with local needs and desires. This
is especially relevant for indigenous attractions. Developers must understand community attitudes and
needs and accommodate them in their development plans. The challenge of course is that within any
community a wide range of opinions and stakeholders compete for attention. There is no such thing as
a single community perspective.

--- Chunk 76 ---
When managed sensitively, tourism can empower people to take control of their own future. Much
debate centers on the socio-cultural transformations that tourism can bring to communities.
Interaction between visitor and communities can dilute or even destroy traditional cultures.
Conversely, these encounters can also foment opportunities for greater understanding and learning.
Although difficult to generalize, socio-cultural impacts typically depend upon the degree of cultural
similarity or dissimilarity between the developers and communities as well as the following factors:

¢ The type and numbers of visitors to the community: In general the greater the number of
visitors the higher the impact, although this depends on how visitors interact with the local
community.

--- Chunk 77 ---
¢ The type and numbers of visitors to the community: In general the greater the number of
visitors the higher the impact, although this depends on how visitors interact with the local
community.

¢ The level of dependence that the community has on tourism

¢ The size, scale, and pace of development. Too fast development can overwhelm a system’s
capacity to adapt.

* Community attitudes towards

--- Chunk 78 ---
¢ The size, scale, and pace of development. Too fast development can overwhelm a system’s
capacity to adapt.

* Community attitudes towards

Community-based tourism has become increasingly popular. Recent developments include concepts
such as Community Benefit Tourism Initiatives and Pro-Poor Tourism to create local economic
benefits for communities through community control of tourism development. Here NGOs build local
capabilities in the community necessary for the implementation of a sustainable development strategy.
Many authorities cite ecotourism as an approach to empower communities (UNWTO, 2011). See
Table 2.1.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 2|

Table 2.1. Ecotourism Impacts on Local Communities (UNWTO, 2011)

Economic empowerment

Psychological empowerment

--- Chunk 79 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 2|

Table 2.1. Ecotourism Impacts on Local Communities (UNWTO, 2011)

Economic empowerment

Psychological empowerment

Social empowerment

Ecotourism brings lasting economic
gains to a local community. Cash
earned is shared between many house-

holds in the community.

For some, self-esteem is enhanced
because of outside recognition of the
uniqueness and value of their cul-
ture, their natural resources and their
traditional knowledge. This leads to
increased confidence in seeking edu-
cation and subsequent access to em-
ployment.

Community cohesion is improved

as individuals and families work
together to build a successful
ecotourism venture. Some funds
raised are used for community de-
velopment purposes, e.g. to build

--- Chunk 80 ---
Community cohesion is improved

as individuals and families work
together to build a successful
ecotourism venture. Some funds
raised are used for community de-
velopment purposes, e.g. to build

schools or improve roads.

Ecotourism merely results in small,
spasmodic cash gains for a local com-
munity. Most profits go to local elites,

outside operators, government agen-

cies, etc. Gain not evenly spread be-

cause some lack capital and/or appro-
priate skills.

Many people have not shared in the
benefits of ecotourism, yet they may
face hardships because of reduced
access to the resources of a protected

area.

--- Chunk 81 ---
Many people have not shared in the
benefits of ecotourism, yet they may
face hardships because of reduced
access to the resources of a protected

area.

Many in the community take on
outside values and lose respect
for traditional culture and for
elders. Can cause resentment and
jealousy as individuals, families,
ethnic or socio-economic groups

compete.

ENVIRONMENTAL DIMENSIONS OF SUSTAINABILITY

The quality of the environment, both natural and man-made, is essential to tourism. Tourism’s

relationship with the environment, however, is complex. It involves many activities that can adversely

alter the environment. Many impacts arise from infrastructural construction such as roads, airports

--- Chunk 82 ---
alter the environment. Many impacts arise from infrastructural construction such as roads, airports

resorts, hotels, restaurants, shops, golf courses, and marinas. Tourism can gradually or rapidly destroy

the very resources on which it depends. On the other hand, tourism has the potential to benefit the

environment by protecting it. Tourism can raise awareness of environmental values and serve as a tool

to finance protection as well as increase their economic value (UNEP, 2011).

In the 1950s it [tourism and the environment] was viewed as being one of

coexistence... However, with the advent of mass tourism in the 1960s, increasing

pressure was put on natural areas for tourism developments. Together with the

--- Chunk 83 ---
coexistence... However, with the advent of mass tourism in the 1960s, increasing

pressure was put on natural areas for tourism developments. Together with the

growing environmental awareness and concerns of the early 1970s, the relationship

was perceived to be in conflict. During the next decade this view was endorsed by

many others...at the same time a new suggestion was emerging that the relationship

could be beneficial to both tourism and the environment (Dowling, 1992, p. 33).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

22

--- Chunk 84 ---
could be beneficial to both tourism and the environment (Dowling, 1992, p. 33).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS

22

Tourism’s environmental impacts have generated significant debate in relation to sustainability. Such
impacts include noise, scenic deterioration from development (e.g. high rise hotels), transport-related
congestion and atmospheric emissions (i.e. greenhouse gases) as well as solid and effluent discharges.
Yet the destination environment is arguably one of the main attractions of tourism and is the resource
base upon which tourism depends.

--- Chunk 85 ---
Tourism development leads to land use change, energy consumption, and impacts on wildlife.
However, it is difficult to determine how much change directly results from tourism compared to
natural environmental change, and resident behavior. Natural attractions may need public sector
intervention to manage visitors. The precise environmental impacts and their subsequent management
will vary according to environment. There are numerous strategies to manage demand at destination

and specific sites (UNWTO, 2011).

ECOTOURISM AND BIODIVERSITY

Tourism, especially ecotourism, can benefit the environment. The case study “Positive outcomes of
ecotourism” demonstrates some positive outcomes of ecotourism (UNWTO, 2011).

--- Chunk 86 ---
Tourism, especially ecotourism, can benefit the environment. The case study “Positive outcomes of
ecotourism” demonstrates some positive outcomes of ecotourism (UNWTO, 2011).

Ecotourism requires regulation, and the following case study “Ecotourism Kenya’s Eco-rating scheme”
illustrates the approach taken by Ecotourism Kenya to promote certified ecotourism and sustainable
tourism practices (UNWTO, 2011).

--- Chunk 87 ---
Tourism can either threaten or support biodiversity. UNWTO and the Secretariat of the Convention
on Biological Diversity (CBD) have been collaborating since the International Year on Ecotourism in
2002. In 2006 UNWTO established the Consulting Unit on Tourism and Biodiversity. UNWTO also
participates in the UN inter-agency Environmental Management Group (EMG) report on advancing
the biodiversity agenda within the UN system. This work contributes to the preparation of the CBD’s
Strategic Plan for 2011-2020. The EMG report 1) aids the formulation of post-2010 biodiversity
targets; 2) provides information about policy interactions within the UN with respect to biodiversity;
creates awareness in the UN about the CBD process; and identifies how collaboration in the UN can

--- Chunk 88 ---
creates awareness in the UN about the CBD process; and identifies how collaboration in the UN can
support the biodiversity agenda (UNWTO, 2011).

--- Chunk 89 ---
TRANSPORT AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Global organizations that monitor climate change forecast that by 2030 transport-related carbon
dioxide emissions will rise 80% from their 2002 levels. The insatiable global demand for travel and the
modern attachment to the car, make changes to tourism challenging.

Many climate scientists predict that society must reduce emissions by 50-80% to avoid major climatic
shifts at the same time that tourism is increasing its emissions. While global agreements such as the
Kyoto Protocol set targets for cutting emissions, the transportation and tourism sectors continue to
grow. This presents a major challenge for tourism’s long-term sustainability, since existing travel

--- Chunk 90 ---
* To see case studies visit
www.gwu.edu/~iits/Sustainable_Tourism_Online_Learning/Mullis/Policy_Practices_ UNWTO_book_feb.pdf

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 23

patterns must change in order to reduce emissions. More fuel-efficient, less polluting technologies alone
will not entirely compensate. Travel patterns must change, perhaps radically. Reduction targets then
may imply slower growth in air travel, perhaps even a decline.

--- Chunk 91 ---
Two shifts may include an increase in rail and other terrestrial transportation, though these two run
risks of congestion and limited capacity. Tourism in industrialized countries, then, will need to slow
growth to compensate for growth in emissions in developing countries. Ultimately the most radical
solution will be the de-carbonization of the tourism industry, assisted by new technologies and travel
management, based on emissions quotas and pricing structures to limit growth. This will require major
leaps forward in transportation technology and policy innovation to achieve such drops in carbon
emissions.

--- Chunk 92 ---
A study of low carbon-based land transport in the United Kingdom by Bristow et al. (2008) offers a
number of useful insights and suggestions for how technological change may assist de-carbonization
including:

° Efficiency gains of the internal combustion engine (presupposing available oil supplies)

¢ Hybridization of car engines in smaller, more efficient vehicles

¢ Hybrid buses and electric vehicles powered with fuel cell technology

¢ Greater use of bio-fuels

¢ Electrification of the rail network, which could save 12% compared with conventional diesel
engines, and could be improved further through regenerative braking and lighter trains

¢ Restraints on demand through new price structures

¢ Improved pricing and quality service of public transportation

--- Chunk 93 ---
¢ Restraints on demand through new price structures

¢ Improved pricing and quality service of public transportation

¢ Workplace transportation strategies such as car sharing and telecommuting

¢ Policy measures such as allowing continued increases in petrol prices

In aviation other measures are emerging such as the European Emission Trading Scheme proposing a
greater user pay approach to air travel. Policy, nevertheless, is only slowly addressing carbon emissions
(Bristow et al., 2008). Technology is a partial answer. Tourist behavior must also change. See the case
study (UNWTO, 2011). on how Iberian Airlines is reducing its carbon emissions at
http://www.gwu.edu/~iits/Sustainable_Tourism Online _Learning/Mullis/Policy Practices UNWTO

_book_feb.pdf

--- Chunk 94 ---
_book_feb.pdf

CULTURAL RESOURCES AND CLIMATE CHANGE

Climate change also affects cultural resources. According to Climate Change and Tourism: Responding
to Global Challenges, (UNWTO &UNEP, 2008) climate change can harm architectural heritage:

¢ Rising sea level may flood coastal structures

* Coastal erosion can cause flooding and structural damage

¢ Increased rainfall can flood foundations

¢ Reduced drainage could increase flooding

¢ Increased wind could damage roofs and walls. Deteriorated structures especially may suffer.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 24

--- Chunk 95 ---
¢ Reduced drainage could increase flooding

¢ Increased wind could damage roofs and walls. Deteriorated structures especially may suffer.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 24

In 2005, the UNESCO World Heritage Centre assessed the impacts of climate change on World
Heritage. The 2007 report contains 26 case studies of natural and cultural heritage. It found, for
example, that buried archaeological material could be rapidly lost if soil structure and composition
changed due to altered precipitation patterns, permafrost melting, and floods. Though costly, possible
mitigation strategies for cultural heritage include:

--- Chunk 96 ---
¢ Implementation of master and response plans, such as water supply planning (in drought
susceptible destinations), risk assessment and preparedness strategies, and early warning
systems.

¢ Use of monitoring to assess changes and justify protection.

¢ Reconstruction and stabilization of historical buildings and archaeological sites combining
traditional materials and skills and modern engineering

ENERGY USE AND ECO-EFFICIENCY

--- Chunk 97 ---
¢ Reconstruction and stabilization of historical buildings and archaeological sites combining
traditional materials and skills and modern engineering

ENERGY USE AND ECO-EFFICIENCY

The term eco-efficiency refers to how resource use in tourism can evaluate energy use and
economic use. As energy use is the principal contributor of emissions, this tool helps to
logically measure and compare the relative efficiency of tourism versus other sectors of the
economy and different forms of tourism. The energy efficiency of the tourism sector can be
divided into three discrete sectors: transport, accommodation and the activities of visitors at
the destination. The examples below demonstrate some of the measures being undertaken by
accommodation providers to save energy and water.

--- Chunk 98 ---
Globally, there are significant variations in eco-efficiency levels that are often a result
of the impact of long-haul travel on the tourists’ carbon footprint (Géssling et al.,
2005). Tourism is much less favorable in terms of its eco-efficiency compared to other
industry sectors, since it is a highly energy and resource-intensive activity.
Interestingly, Géssling et al. (2005) question the efficacy of pro-poor tourism
strategies that are dependent upon the movement of long-haul tourists from western
industrialized nations to developing countries. Given the poor eco-efficiency of such
tourist flows, this is a major challenge to our thinking on sustainability and poverty
alleviation. If greenhouse gases are to drop by 80% by 2030 or 2050, we need a

--- Chunk 99 ---
tourist flows, this is a major challenge to our thinking on sustainability and poverty
alleviation. If greenhouse gases are to drop by 80% by 2030 or 2050, we need a
major reorientation of tourist travel away from long haul to more local and shorter
haul destinations. The longer the traveling distances, the less eco-efficient the trip,
but this may be offset to a degree by staying longer at the destination with higher
expenditures per day.

--- Chunk 100 ---
Other issues like long-term energy supplies of oil may lead to a reorientation and re-
pricing of long-haul travel alongside more environmental polluter-pay type measures
that will certainly provide obstacles to tourist travel. In this respect, the challenge for
tourism businesses is to implement a future aimed at carbon neutral tourism, to
reduce costs and the energy consumption, to offset the uncompetitive position this
may place destinations in over the long-term. Yet natural limitations, such as water,

may also add a degree of constraint on future tourism development as the next section

shows (UNWTO, 2011, pp. 68-70).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 25

WATER SUPPLY AND SHORTAGES

--- Chunk 101 ---
may also add a degree of constraint on future tourism development as the next section

shows (UNWTO, 2011, pp. 68-70).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 25

WATER SUPPLY AND SHORTAGES

Climate change impacts freshwater supplies, making them scarcer in some regions of the world.
Tourism depends on water for meeting visitors’ basic needs (drinking, sanitation, and hygiene).
Tourism has to compete with other sectors of the economy (e.g. agriculture and industry) and domestic
needs for water. Studies have shown that the average tourist can use anywhere from 200 to 2,000 liters
a day. This use can be significant in regions of water scarcity.

--- Chunk 102 ---
A World Wildlife Fund (2004) study of tourism and water use in the Mediterranean found that daily
average tourist water use in Spain ranged from 300 and 850 liters where swimming pools and golf
courses were present. Géssling et al. (2005) calculated the global average for tourist water
consumption to be 222 liters per day.

--- Chunk 103 ---
The UNWTO 1” International Conference on Climate Change and Tourism in 2007 highlighted
threats and risks of water scarcity to tourism. In small island states, water supplies can be directly
impacted by highly consumptive tourists. Already some islands now ship in fresh water during peak
season. Some countries, such as the United Arab Emirates, have turned to desalination, despite the
method’s high costs of money, energy, and greenhouse gas emissions (assuming the use of fossil fuels,
rather than solar). Political conflict has already begun to stir due to competition for limited water.

--- Chunk 104 ---
Long-term sustainability depends greatly on how water is used. Places that overpump ancient aquifers,
for example, suffer saltwater intrusion. In addition to these problems, climate change compounds the
availability and distribution of water. Among the most obvious solutions include the reduction of water
use (such as halting irrigation of ornamental plants and replacing them with more drought-tolerant
choices). Hotels can redesign swimming pools and increase desalination. Golf courses can recycle
treated effluent, rather than use potable water to irrigate. They can also use saltwater on salt-resistant
grass (UNWTO, 2011).

ETHICAL CODES AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

--- Chunk 105 ---
ETHICAL CODES AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Communities and organizations are beginning to use codes of practice to guide tourism development
and visitor behavior. The UNWTO Global Code of Ethics for Tourism (GCET)
(www.gwu.edu/~iits/Sustainable_Tourism Online _Learning/Mullis/WTOGlobalEthicsCode.pdf) is a
prime example. Adopted in 1999, GCET is a comprehensive set of principles whose purpose is to guide

--- Chunk 106 ---
stakeholders — central and local governments, local communities, tourism sector and its professionals,
as well as visitors, both international and domestic — in tourism development. The UNWTO General
Assembly passed a resolution to create the Code in Istanbul in 1997. More than 70 UNWTO member
states and other entities participated in its development. In October 1999, the General Assembly in
Santiago unanimously approved the ten-point Global Code of Ethics for Tourism (UNWTO, 2011).

--- Chunk 107 ---
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is another catalyst for social development. CSR is a voluntary self-
regulation by businesses of their own adherence to rules, regulations, ethical standards, and laws.
Companies self-report their effect on the environment, communities, stakeholders, and consumers.
Thus leading corporations not only produce an annual report of financial performance, but also their
performance in sustainable development and responsible business. Core elements of a sustainability
report include corporate policy, strategy and objectives to achieve and maintain sustainable

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 26

development, and data to reflect performance measured against specific environmental and social

--- Chunk 108 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 26

development, and data to reflect performance measured against specific environmental and social

targets. They also include future targets and a summary of key steps to help achieve these targets.

Figure 2.3: What is Sustainability Reporting? (BMT Group, 2008)

Thousands of organizations disclose their greenhouse gas emissions, water use, and climate change
strategies through The Carbon Disclosure Project, an independent not-for-profit organization that
maintains the largest database of corporate climate change information in the world
(https://cdproject.net/en-US/Pages/HomePage.aspx) The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is a
network that pioneered the world’s most widely used sustainability-reporting framework. GRI is

--- Chunk 109 ---
committed to the framework’s continuous improvement and worldwide application. GRI’s goals
include mainstreaming disclosure of environmental, social, and governance performance
(www.globalreporting.org/Home).

The CSR approach depends on self-interest as well as philanthropic interest in stakeholders as well as
pursuit of short-term profits. CSR also reflects growing interest among consumers concerned that
companies improve relations with both communities and the environment.

--- Chunk 110 ---
To advance this agenda across the global tourism community, UNWTO launched TOURpact GC in
September 2008. This new CSR framework for companies, associations, and other tourism stakeholders
reflects the principles of the Global Compact and UNWTO’s GCET. The Global Compact is a
voluntary initiative designed to mainstream ten key principles of social responsibility in business and to
catalyze support for the UN MDGs.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 27

POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND COMMUNITY WELLBEING

--- Chunk 111 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 27

POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND COMMUNITY WELLBEING

Tourism as a force for poverty alleviation cannot be underestimated. Extreme poverty is widespread in
many developing countries where access to clean water, food, shelter, and medical care is limited.
According to World Bank (2008) revised estimates on poverty, 1.4 billion people live at or below the
poverty line of $1.25 per day.

In many developing countries, tourism is already a major economic player. Tourism is a principal
export in over 80% of developing countries and the main export of one third of them. In some
developing countries, notably small island states, tourism can account for over 25% of the GDP
(UNWTO & SNV, 2010a).

--- Chunk 112 ---
Pro-poor tourism is tourism used strategically to help reduce poverty. The concept has a relatively
short history since the late 1990s. It reflects prevailing rhetoric and interest in “solving” poverty. The
“war on poverty” earned credence with the MDGs established by the UN, goals which range from
halving extreme poverty to halting the spread of HIV/AIDS and providing universal primary education
by 2015. UNWTO has focused on poverty alleviation, recognizing the pivotal role tourism can play.

SOCIAL MARKETING AND NEW MEDIA

--- Chunk 113 ---
SOCIAL MARKETING AND NEW MEDIA

Social marketing involves the application of commercial marketing principles and other social change
techniques to achieve socially desirable goals and influence individual behaviors. Social marketing
communicates benefits of more responsible tourism, such as that used to reduce poverty. But social
marketing is more complex than advertising. It applies marketing concepts to improve human welfare.
NGOs in particular have used social marketing. There is a growing recognition of its potential in
responsible tourism (UNWTO, 2011).

DESTINATION DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS

What makes a destination truly competitive?

--- Chunk 114 ---
DESTINATION DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS

What makes a destination truly competitive?

The ability to increase tourism expenditure, to increasingly attract visitors while
providing them with satisfying memorable experiences, and to do so in a profitable
way, while enhancing the wellbeing of destination residents and preserving the
natural capital of the destination for future generations (Ritchie & Crouch, 2003, p.2).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 28

Comparative Destination Competitiveness and Sustainability tae
Advantage Advantage
Qualifying and Amplifying Determinants

Destination Planning, Policy, and Development

Destination Management

Core Resources and Attractions
Supporting Factors

Figure 2.4. Model of Destination Competitiveness (Ritchie & Crouch, 2003)

--- Chunk 115 ---
Destination Planning, Policy, and Development

Destination Management

Core Resources and Attractions
Supporting Factors

Figure 2.4. Model of Destination Competitiveness (Ritchie & Crouch, 2003)

°
Ww
Sw
ae
oO

2d
‘B96
y =
vo

ae
ism]
°
O

JuUaUTUOTAUY O1DVYW [eqo[H
JUOUIUOTIAUY O1DVYW [eqo[D

--- Chunk 116 ---
Figure 2.4. Model of Destination Competitiveness (Ritchie & Crouch, 2003)

°
Ww
Sw
ae
oO

2d
‘B96
y =
vo

ae
ism]
°
O

JuUaUTUOTAUY O1DVYW [eqo[H
JUOUIUOTIAUY O1DVYW [eqo[D

Tourism, by virtue of its nature, will always be subject to extraneous local and global issues that impact
market trends relating to travel. For destinations to improve their competitiveness, it is advisable to
adopt an approach that can ride out the highs and lows of the tourism rollercoaster and which
preserves destination appeal for years to come. The tourism product should be able to evolve and
adapt, not just to attract and retain visitors, but to balance economic growth with shifts in the social
and environmental needs of the destination (UNWTO, 2011).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 29

--- Chunk 117 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 29

INNOVATION IN DESTINATION MANAGEMENT

Without innovations, business cannot
attain sustainable growth and
development. As tourism has expanded
and become increasingly competitive,
destination management organizations
have had to focus and specialize to stay
ahead.

Innovation can be seen from various points
of view. First, being strategic and
intelligent can be identified as the main
driving force for the innovation. For
example, the unexpected decrease in tourist
arrivals to the destination motivates
management to act and develop an
innovative strategy to reverse the
downturn. On the other hand, the goals

can be the driving force for the innovation.

--- Chunk 118 ---
can be the driving force for the innovation.

For instance, if the tourism destination set Figure 2.5. Factors that Characterize Innovative and

its goal to increase income from Successful Tourism Destinations (UNWTO, 2011)
international arrivals,

it might introduce new cultural tourism products.

HUMAN RESOURCES

Tourism is first and foremost a people business: people turn the supply of resources into experience
opportunities, which are then consumed by visitors. The high level of human involvement in tourism
experiences is key to creating value for the consumer. The relationship between consumer and
employee can make or break the experience and is entirely dependent upon three interconnected
elements to human resource development: education, training, and personnel management.

--- Chunk 119 ---
UNWTO has a critical role in promoting human resource development (HRM) and some of its affiliate
members have provided examples of best practices. The diverse range of tasks requires an
understanding of labor markets and the overall management of staff activities. In addition, one of the
greatest challenges is to manage a diverse work force with different cultural, age, and gender
demographics.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 30

grievance and
dispute procedures

Figure 2.6. Issues for the Human Resource Manager to Understand (UNWTO, 2011)

MANAGING CRISES AND DISASTER

--- Chunk 120 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 30

grievance and
dispute procedures

Figure 2.6. Issues for the Human Resource Manager to Understand (UNWTO, 2011)

MANAGING CRISES AND DISASTER

Prosperous tourism requires macroeconomic stability and relative stability of other factors that shape
tourist decision-making such as the market’s perception of the destination. When shocking events such
as terrorist attacks, natural phenomena, and other disasters such as the onset of SARS or swine flu
occur, tourism is one of the first sectors to absorb the impact. There have been a growing number of
such events year after year (Glaesser, 2006). Global media immediately alert the world to these events
which can contribute to a tourist’s decision to cancel or change destinations.

--- Chunk 121 ---
The first-impact nature of tourism demands advance crisis planning especially many crisis management
plans relegate non-essential activities such as tourism to the lowest priority. In the midst of crisis,
political attention understandably concentrates on stabilizing the situation and providing basic needs
such as shelter, food, water, and medical care.

Tourism stakeholders need to ensure capacity to weather crises. Without such foresight, destinations
will unlikely build capacity to recover (UNWTO, 2011).

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 3|

CREATING SUSTAINABLE PARTNERSHIPS

--- Chunk 122 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 3|

CREATING SUSTAINABLE PARTNERSHIPS

There is growing recognition within the tourism community that the effective destination tourism
management is best achieved through effective public and private partnerships. Consequently, in the
last two decades, management theory has broadened its traditional focus on planning, leading,
organizing, and coordination to include partnerships, cooperation, and collaboration. UNWTO now
actively promotes greater collaboration among stakeholders in the tourism sector.

--- Chunk 123 ---
Collaboration is vital for increasing destination competitiveness. Several elements increase
competitiveness. Greater emphasis on partnerships enables public institutions to address the dispersed
perhaps unconsolidated network of providers that has afflicted the tourism sector. To remain attractive,
destinations must pursue innovation across the tourism supply chain. The cooperation of different
stakeholders helps make the destination more visitor-focused so that the different interactions the
visitor has with the destination can be enhanced and value added. This in turn helps fulfill visitor
satisfaction, encourages repeat visitation, and increases word-of-mouth marketing.

--- Chunk 124 ---
The concept of social capital is also meaningful in this context. Many organizations and enterprises
recognize that investing in this form of capital — in communications, linkages, and networks with
others — and the support and exchange of ideas this investment brings, they are investing in their
survival. Often the motive for multi-stakeholder collaboration is expressed quite generally — simply
that the task of delivering sustainable tourism is too complex and there are too many stakeholders, so it
is essential to work together (UNWTO & SNV, 2010b).

Some sustainable tourism partnerships include:

--- Chunk 125 ---
Some sustainable tourism partnerships include:

Public-private partnerships: Tourism, like other economic sectors, has always sought methods to
govern its own affairs with the greatest level of stakeholder cooperation. This is why public-private
collaboration occupies a preeminent place in public tourism policy at any destination anywhere.

Tourism business networks: Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are the dominant business form in
most countries, but they are highly fragmented and uncoordinated. One action that many public sector
entities with an interest in tourism have promoted is the formation of SME networks. Successful
network development depends on several factors, as is illustrated in Figure 2.7.

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 32

--- Chunk 126 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 32

Figure 2.7. Critical Success Factors in Network Development for SMEs
(UNWTO, 2011)

Destination management organizations: At a regional level, the DMO should actively engage all its
stakeholders. The private sector in particular likes the DMO’s marketing role. Often the DMO will
have its own marketing budget but it will also be a bridge between national agencies and the industry.
While the national tourism authority will almost certainly be the single most significant tourism
marketer, the collective industry budget will be much greater. If the DMO can bring together public
and private resources so that they mutually reinforce, the collaboration can leverage those resources to
a greater extent.

--- Chunk 127 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 33

WIDER COLLABORATION AND FUTURE AGENDAS

Alongside SME collaboration, there should also be collaboration of the public and private sectors and
with other organizations. Ideally public and private sectors collaborate with academia (Figure 2.8),
known as the Triple Helix Model.

This model has a number of
drawbacks, not the least of
which is forging agreement
between parties with
different objectives. The
collaborations that have
seen the most success are
those involving public-
private

partnerships rather than
those that include
academia, NGOs, or civil

society. This deficiency may
arise from different forms of

--- Chunk 128 ---
partnerships rather than
those that include
academia, NGOs, or civil

society. This deficiency may
arise from different forms of

knowledge that are not
easily shared and Figure 2.8. Triple Helix Model (UNWTO, 2011)
understood between
academia and other
sectors. As a result, knowledge sharing remains limited and the Triple Helix model has only been
embraced in a limited number of settings despite the role of government policy to promote such

knowledge exchange from academic tourism researchers to institutes in many countries.

In the future, there is need for the wider use of adaptive management to enrich public-private
partnerships and to make the Triple Helix operational (OUNWTO, 2011).

MECHANISMS FOR DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE

--- Chunk 129 ---
MECHANISMS FOR DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE

Efforts to gather data on grants and loans to promote ecotourism are obscured by ecotourism’s vague
definition and confusion with larger development initiatives. However, research by George
Washington University’s International Institute of Tourism Studies (GWU/IITS) provides a point of
context. Through their Development Assistance Network for Tourism Enhancement and Investment
(DANTED), researchers found that from 2001 to 2010, at least US$9.43 billion will have poured into
363 projects from donors for tourism development projects around the world. Foundation funding for
ecotourism would make up less than one percent of this amount, which averages $US one billion
each year.

--- Chunk 130 ---
Many developing countries today look to tourism as a potentially promising avenue for economic and
human development. This perception is relatively new for some of them, and reflects the rapid increase
in tourism arrivals, numbers and revenues for many developing countries in recent years. Traditionally,
tourism has been given lower priority than agriculture or manufacturing since it has not been

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 34

--- Chunk 131 ---
considered a significant or appropriate source of growth. Increasingly, however, the sector is valued as a
means of earning export revenues, generating jobs, promoting economic diversification, supporting a
more services-oriented economy, helping to revive declining urban areas and cultural activities, and
opening up remote rural regions. Foreign direct investment (FDI) is one vehicle through which
developing countries can develop their tourism sector; but the dynamics of FDI and its implications in
this growing sector have been relatively little studied. Because tourism is an industry that needs to be
managed carefully, with or without FDI, and because FDI in this activity presents special challenges

--- Chunk 132 ---
managed carefully, with or without FDI, and because FDI in this activity presents special challenges
and concerns, policy makers need to design policies that take advantage of opportunities it offers while
minimizing its costs.

--- Chunk 133 ---
The impact of tourism-related FDI can vary according to specific country and historical contexts.

It finds, for example, that much depends upon the host country’s level of economic and human
development, including the extent to which it can leverage the presence of transnational corporations
to foster domestic enterprise. This ability relates to host countries’ absorptive and productive capacities,
which in turn is associated with the extent to which foreign enterprises have linkages with the domestic
economy, be it in ways that are complementary or competitive vis-a-vis local companies. These
elements can, to some degree, be influenced by government policy (UNCTAD, 2007).

THE FUTURE OF TOURISM

--- Chunk 134 ---
Understanding how the tourism sector changes and anticipating how tourism demand and supply will
develop in the future remains a subject of intense interest for businesses and destination management
organizations alike. Anticipating if and how tourism will change in the future is a strategic
requirement for the tourism sector, especially since the public sector needs to understand implications
of tourism growth to develop infrastructure and facilities of the future. Given lead times for new
infrastructure development (typically in excess of ten years for airports and transportation
infrastructure) managers need both to know what the future may look like and also understand some
tools and techniques for outlining it. Tools and techniques to develop an understanding of the future of

--- Chunk 135 ---
tools and techniques for outlining it. Tools and techniques to develop an understanding of the future of
tourism will be examined in more depth in Unit 5 (UNWTO, 2011).

--- Chunk 136 ---
SUMMARY

--- Chunk 137 ---
UNWTO has been instrumental in setting policy and practice recommendations for sustainable
tourism. As a product, tourism is different in that it involves extensive pre- and post-consumption
stages, so it is important to understand the visitor as well as destination management strategy when
making policy. Market segmentation provides a useful framework for understanding different visitor
characteristics. Many other social, environmental, and conservation-related factors affect the
sustainability of policy and practices. As we will see in later units, the negative impacts of tourism
development can gradually destroy the environmental resources upon which it depends; yet tourism is
uniquely positioned to make a positive contribution to conservation. Tourism also can be a force for

--- Chunk 138 ---
uniquely positioned to make a positive contribution to conservation. Tourism also can be a force for
social change as more travel companies engage in corporate reporting and develop new media
marketing strategies. Because tourism as an industry sector is very fragmented and because of its
inherent challenges, sustainable collaboration with partners and other stakeholders is critical to
achieving competitive and sustainable tourism.

--- Chunk 139 ---
GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 35

FOR MORE INFORMATION

¢ On funding and investment, see the Sustainable Investment and Finance for Tourism Module.

* On destination development, see the Tourism Destination Management Module.

¢ For a copy of the Global Code of Ethics go to
www.gwu.edu/~iits/Sustainable_Tourism_Online_Learning/Mullis/WTOGlobalEthicsCode.pdf

GLOBAL TOURISM: ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GOALS 36

